Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and fantasy,
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. Some of the most exciting science fiction being written today
comes from the pen of Jack Chalker and it's clear that he's a popular writer too probably best known
for the five books in the Well World series. In fact the first novel in that series Midnight at
the Well of Souls has sold over a million copies. Chalker's first book came out not that long ago,
1976, so his work is still fairly recent. He'd been active in the field though years before he started
writing corresponding with authors and other fans, attending conventions, editing a fanzine, even
starting a small publishing company Mirage Press to produce material on science fiction but Chalker
says he'd always planned on being a writer. I'd always known I was going to be a writer. I mean
there just was never any question in my mind but it was just sort of something that you never really
sat down and did. I used to play around with stories here and there. Uh John Campbell was a big help
uh during the 60s. I would float ideas and fragments off him and he would be very very nice
and tell me exactly what was wrong. Of course what infuriated everybody about John Campbell uh was that
uh the man had been editing for 40 years and he could put his finger on something and tell you exactly
what you were doing wrong and it was terribly infuriating to discover that he was right in almost every case.
Uh you saw why he did it from 39 until he died and uh as a result of being able to have the help of people
like Campbell and August Derleth and a lot of really established writers and editors in the field,
uh i was able to get a good recognition of exactly what was required in the field.
Uh it just was a matter of sitting down and doing it. Fortunately he did sit down and do it
publishing Jungle of Stars in 1976. So I sat on a typewriter and there was really no question in my mind as to
uh what I do first. I had been playing around with an idea for years and years and years. There's even
a short fanzine version of it 20 years old uh called Jungle or Jungle of Stars or uh there were a lot of
code words but Jungle was always in it. And um I sat down and wrote the thing. I wrote. It had been around so
long in my mind and discussions and so on that, there was just no problems no resistance no having to
think it out or anything else. And I wrote it solidly in about two and a half three weeks
and then sent it off. And it's a good old-fashioned type. It's a science fiction murder mystery
uh very much very much very much at home in the old uh Astounding, Analogs and so on even though it
does have some modern touches to it.
Some of his earlier contacts with people in the field of science fiction paid off
one of them Judy Lindal Ray bought the novel. Judy Lindal Ray uh who had just become editor of
uh Ballantine, which was soon to have a science fiction line named after her,
uh took a look at it we'd known each other for about 15 years. And uh she put off reading it for
quite a long time because she was afraid that if it was terrible and she said so that you know she'd
blow our friendship or something. Finally she said uh uh i we got together at a convention and she admitted
to me all this she said okay I'll read it but be prepared and about four days later I get a phone
call and she said hey this is great I want to buy it and that was the first sale.
Since then Chalker has published some 13 novels and he's still going strong. More with Jack Chalker next
time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Ficiton Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is David Crews and Daryl Lane.
A hike through a national park and a war game board, unlikely sources for a tremendously popular science fiction novel.
The novel is Midnight at the Well of Souls. The author is Jack Chalker.
The book concerns the Well World, an artificial planet constructed by a vanished civilization.
The Well World is divided into 1,560 separate environments. Separate worlds, really. Each
with its own climate, geography, and intelligent inhabitants.
Each division is shaped like a hexagon, and for that reason they're called hexes.
Chalker was in an isolated village called Stehekin, on the shore of Lake Chelan in central Washington
state, when he got the idea for the Well World.
I got to sitting by the lake that night and talking with some people, and I got the idea
for this large world built by a long dead race, and so on, and I didn't really have much of
an idea of what it was, and they do have a service out of Stehekin that'll take you up to Trailhead.
And so I went up to Trailhead, and I wound up walking down. I'm a great hiker as long as the
direction's down. I'm afraid I've never been to the bottom of the Grand Canyon because I can get
down there, but I can't get back up. But here was a trail that was tailor-made for me. It was down the
Cascades all the way. So I took it, and it took about eight and a half hours to walk the whole distance.
And during that time, you go through eight climate zones. You start off in the snow. You wind up in a
rainforest. And some of the changes are rather abrupt. You just go around a switchback, and it
just changes from one climate to another, each with its own different plants and insects and
occasional mammals. Even the birds seem to be different. And I thought, yeah, this is how that
big world would be like. So even though while I was on my way down, I was kind of scribbling ideas.
And I got the idea for this giant world composed of basically worldlets, different abrupt geography,
climate, landforms, you name it, each with its own dominant race. By the time I hit bottom, I had it
pretty well worked out, although I didn't really know what the shape of the things were going to be.
Back home in Maryland, he got some help on the shape of the well world.
I was discussing the idea with a science fiction fan named Ben Yalow, son of the Nobel winner,
Rosalyn Yalow. And he says, why don't you just use an Avalon Hill game board?
And I thought, yeah, that would work. So we got out an Avalon Hill map, a war game map, and a little
trusty calculator. We laid a grid of these hexagons around a roughly Earth-sized world.
Of course, we cannot cover a sphere with hexagons. So that means we had the north zone and the south
zone, which would be the embassy's entry and exit points that would cover our sphere. And then it was
just simply a matter of sitting down, listing what was required to do, what kind of creatures and land
climate and so on I would have to do for the route of the story, dropping by Avalon Hill, which I lived
very near at the time, picking up some blank maps, and just working it out from there.
What Chalker worked out turned into his best-known novel, Midnight at the Well of Souls.
It was so popular that it went out of print a few months after its initial press run.
And Chalker has added four novels since then, making a five-book series in the Well World.
The whole thing turned out to be a colorful and exciting epic on the origin of the universe
and all of the creatures in it. It should fascinate any reader of science fiction.
More on Jack Chalker next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
Science Fiction Radio Show.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Crews.
The five novels in Jack Chalker's Well World series are based on a familiar science fiction
concept.
And that concept is the notion of a long-dead race of superior beings whose artifacts are
found by humans.
But there are a couple of interesting twists given to this concept by Chalker.
One twist is the principal artifact by the vanished race. It's a planet called the Well World.
It's artificial. And its interior is a supercomputer that can transform matter into all sorts of living creatures.
It's really a laboratory planet where species are created and tested before being transferred to various places throughout the universe.
And the other twist is that these superior beings, called the Markovians, aren't actually gone.
They just transform themselves into other, more primitive beings.
Chalker talks about the Markovians.
They got to the point where they were gods, literally.
Where their devices could conjure up anything they wanted, just the mere thought of it.
I sense that it pointed out to me that they're sort of like the Krell in the old movie Forbidden Planet,
in that they reach this godhead status.
But the Krell experiment failed, because they couldn't control their passions.
And the Markovian experiment succeeded, and they literally became gods.
Then they became miserable.
There was nothing left to attain.
There was nothing left to know.
There was nothing left, you know.
You got a bunch of creatures that spent millions of years rising to this point,
and they sit around and they say, is this all there is?
At this point, the Markovians decided to start all over again.
The idea of the great experiment that came about was to redo it,
to literally start the Markovians over from scratch,
with different kinds of creatures, different environments,
with no real value system.
I mean, they have to develop their own unique value systems.
They do.
And as a result, they're grown and they're tested on this laboratory world, the well world.
And then they were the ones that worked, the ones that showed promise of survival,
were then set into motion out throughout the universe, including man.
And they had the hopes that eventually one of these races would reach a state of perfection that would not be empty or hollow.
Now, I personally believe that when you reach that state, it is empty and hollow.
But that's just my feeling.
Other people might certainly do think differently.
The Markovians create hundreds of different species, all intelligent, but all incredibly different.
We asked Chalker how he gets ideas for creating such a variety of aliens.
I used a variety of things.
In some cases, a good pictorial natural history text will give you more weird creatures than you've ever seen,
which can be modified.
Some came out of mythology.
Some came more or less direct out of fantasia, sorts of like that.
And a few came out of comic book concepts.
And, you know, you just draw them in from all over and you use basic shapes and basic types.
And then you adjust them to what would happen if these were real, sentient, intelligent creatures.
I found very, very little trouble in coming up with an enormous variety of them.
I'm not sure whether I could come up with 1,560, which is the number I would have to to visit every hex in the well world.
But I've had no trouble coming up with the 200 or 300 so far.
More with Jack Chalker next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Crews.
Before you became a best-selling science fiction author,
Jack Chalker was an avid fan who built an amateur fanzine into a science fiction publishing company.
Chalker started the fanzine in his early teens as a way of making contacts in the field of science fiction
and with the possibility of making a little money at it.
That basically was the reason.
We started with a fanzine, which was run off actually at a school at the beginning because we didn't have anything else.
And he'd got some reasonably good reactions, so I started building up from there.
While I was doing that, actually, I had correspondence already with enormous numbers of people, both professional and fan.
I had so much correspondence, I can't believe how many people I was contacting on a regular basis.
And so I started tapping them and created the fanzine Mirage.
The addition of a $40 surplus mimeograph found in an old store, which I still own, by the way, and which still works,
I was able to start putting out a fanzine called Mirage.
The fanzine was successful because of its high quality, and it led into a small publishing company, Mirage Press.
I was serious and constructive at the same time that everybody else was being just sort of kid hobbyist.
I really had a magazine that discussed the literature, discussed the writers and so on, past and present,
at a time when very few of these were coming out.
And so I attracted a rather large audience of collectors and professional writers and artists and so on.
And I was able to create out of that the Mirage Press, which started off again as mimeographed publications
and then later grew as capital grew into a hardcover and quality paperback publishing account.
Chalker says that Mirage Press was successful from the start.
I started off with a bibliography of H.P. Lovecraft, which I did myself.
Put it together, mimeographed it with the help of August Derleth,
who owned the rights to the H.P. Lovecraft material at the time,
and sold it for what in 1960 was a horrendous fee of $1,
and we sold 100 of them.
Mirage Press publishes non-fiction materials such as bibliographies and critical studies of authors.
Chalker leaves the publishing of fiction to the large companies.
You can't compete with Doubleday, Simon & Schuster, and so on for the good stuff in fiction.
And although I did do a little bit of fiction,
getting into print some books of work that I thought was very, very neglected,
you really have to promote fiction.
Whereas non-fiction and reference material is always, there's always a heavy market,
and there's been a growing market for it.
And so I concentrated in that end.
And we came up with some rather successful books,
Guide to Middle Earth, which in its Ballantine form, which I still own a piece of,
is still selling well in Atlas of Fantasy.
We did three books on sword and sorcery fiction before the comic books discovered Conan.
And occasionally we did rather odd materials,
such as a collection of all of the Ferdinand Feghoot bad puns
that had been published over the years, this kind of thing.
Mostly, though, we were serious reference works,
and we still have a number of them that are standard.
Next time, more with Jack Chalker.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews.
And Daryl Lane.
Jack Chalker's reputation was greatly enhanced
by the popular Well World series of novels.
Now he's at work on a new series,
one which will have four books in it,
entitled The Four Lords of the Diamond.
Two novels have been published so far.
The first is called Lilith, and the second Cerberus.
Chalker comments on the story.
It has a tremendous number of the elements that I have become known for.
It has a lot of new material as well.
It has a lot of political commentary.
It has a lot of social commentary in it.
It is also slam-bang action, Machiavellian intrigue, and everything else, because nobody's going to read your message if you don't entertain first.
As Chalker says, the books have a lot of excitement in them.
In the opening pages of Lilith,
the first book in the series,
a tremendously powerful alien robot
penetrates a top-secret military installation on Earth.
The robot's discovered, but he escapes and heads for a planetary system called the Warden Diamond.
The Earth government sends its top agent.
These are four worlds in one system that are basically a prison planet series, and you get dropped on there, and the foundation idea, which appeals to me an awful lot,
is an alien race discovers us before we discover them decides that it can't win a war against us.
Maybe they're, you know, there's just not as many of them, or there's technological problems or something like that.
So they study us and study us, and they discover that, as in all human societies, there is this massive criminal syndicate,
and that this criminal syndicate, leaders are mostly imprisoned for life on the four lords of the, well, the diamond, the Warden Diamond, these four worlds.
So what the aliens do is they contact these bitter super crooks, and they take out a contract on human civilization.
The agent can't land on any of the four worlds of the Warden Diamond.
A tiny organism on these worlds enters the body and makes a person a virtual prisoner.
Right.
If you try to leave, you die a painful death. There seems to be no cure for it either.
So what the agent does is have his personality implanted into four separate bodies, and these bodies are sent to each of the worlds.
And he monitors what is happening through a computer hookup orbiting the Warden system.
Part of what the book is about is that we have a sort of surrogate him down on each of these worlds who starts off pretty much almost identical to him.
And he's following this whole thing with his whole system of values, beliefs, and so on.
And he's watching the surrogates change into quite different people.
And it begins to eat away at his own sense of values, his own sense of duty.
As a matter of fact, in the third book, he begins to realize that the people who sent him there on this mission anticipated this.
And that his computer detective aide who he has dialogues with and discusses everything with may be more than that.
It may be something of a watchdog.
Chalker promises an exciting ending when the agent struggles with his own newly discovered values, with the computer, and with the aliens.
I don't like cop-outs.
I don't like stringing people along and then not delivering.
So, um, you will get, you will get real, I don't know whether you can say flesh and blood, but something.
Aliens. And, uh, whatever they're made of, uh, you will meet the aliens, you will, uh, have a face down, and the solution to the whole thing
and exactly what's going on is, uh, uh, quite bizarre, and I don't think anybody's going to figure it out.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.